Lowering Deposit Requirements on Polkadot and Kusama Asset Hub (#45)
polkadot-fellows/RFCs: text/000x-lowering-deposits-assethub.md

| **Authors**     | [Aurora Poppyseed](https://github.com/poppyseedDev), [Just_Luuuu](https://github.com/justLuuuu), [Viki Val](https://github.com/vikiival)  |

## Summary

This RFC proposes changing the current deposit requirements on the Polkadot and Kusama Asset Hub for creating NFT collection, minting an individual NFT, and lowering it's coresponding metadata and attribute deposit. The objective is to lower the barrier to entry for NFT creators, fostering a more inclusive and vibrant ecosystem while maintaining network integrity and preventing spam.

## Motivation

The current deposit of 10 DOT for collection creation (along with 0.01 DOT for item deposit and 0.2 DOT for metadata and attribute deposit) on the Polkadot Asset Hub and 0.1 KSM on Kusama Asset Hub presents a significant financial barrier for many NFT creators. By lowering the deposit requirements, we aim to encourage more NFT creators to participate in the Polkadot NFT ecosystem, thereby enriching the diversity and vibrancy of the community and its offerings.

> The actual implementation of the deposit is an arbitrary number coming from [Uniques pallet](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/master/cumulus/parachains/runtimes/assets/asset-hub-rococo/src/lib.rs#L757). It is not a result of any economic analysis. This proposal aims to adjust the deposit from constant to dynamic pricing based on the `deposit` function with respect to stakeholders.

Reviewer: This is a testnet runtime (and the line number on master is already out of date). Can you update to a release tag from the Polkadot runtime?

Author: ```suggestion
The actual implementation of the deposit is an arbitrary number coming from [Uniques pallet]
(https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/afadb830e0a38365a5afec36fd1b2c77896a0a85/cumulus/parachains/runtimes/assets/asset-hub-rococo/src/lib.rs#L756-L762). It is not a result of any economic analysis. This proposal aims to adjust the deposit from constant to dynamic pricing based on the `deposit` function with respect to stakeholders.
```

Author: Would that be branch `release-polkadot-v1.6.0` ?

Author: ```suggestion
The actual implementation of the deposit is an arbitrary number coming from [Uniques pallet](https://github.com/polkadot-fellows/runtimes/blob/7515fc0385f8d48f2d08b2182a24174148e70135/system-parachains/asset-hubs/asset-hub-polkadot/src/lib.rs#L686-L692). It is not a result of any economic analysis. This proposal aims to adjust the deposit from constant to dynamic pricing based on the `deposit` function with respect to stakeholders.
```

Author: Or on [polkadot fellowship](https://github.com/polkadot-fellows/runtimes)?

Reviewer: Yeah exactly, the Fellowship one

- **NFT Platforms**: As the facilitator of artists' relations, NFT Marketplaces has a vested interest in onboarding new users and making the platform more accessible.
- **dApp Developers**: Making the blockspace more accessible will encourage developers to create and build unique dApps in the Polkadot ecosystem.
- **Polkadot Community**: Stands to benefit from an influx of artists, creators and diverse NFT collections, enhancing the overall ecosystem.

Previous discussions have been held within the Polkadot Forum community and with artists expressing their concerns about the deposit amounts. [Link](https://forum.polkadot.network/t/polkadot-assethub-high-nft-collection-deposit/4262).

## Explanation
This RFC proposes a revision of the deposit constants in the nfts pallet on the Polkadot Asset Hub. The new deposit amounts would be determined by a standard deposit formula.

This RFC suggests modifying deposit constants defined in the `nfts` pallet on the Polkadot Asset Hub to require a lower deposit. The reduced deposit amount should be determined by the `deposit` adjusted by the pricing mechanism (arbitrary number/another pricing function). 

### Current code structure

> [Current deposit requirements are as follows](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/master/cumulus/parachains/runtimes/assets/asset-hub-rococo/src/lib.rs#L757)

Reviewer: Testnet

Author: ```suggestion
[Current deposit requirements are as follows](https://github.com/polkadot-fellows/runtimes/blob/main/system-parachains/asset-hubs/asset-hub-polkadot/src/lib.rs#L686-L692)
```

Reviewer: Yeah, but with a commit instead of `main`.

Author: ```suggestion
[Current deposit requirements are as follows](https://github.com/polkadot-fellows/runtimes/commit/c2a3c9881c0ee6393d1665fefd9671d040215188#diff-32714ab945a24cbcc5979fd9065e0c13e0beb59f7533b38e2e97a872b23cb125R596-R600)
```

Author: so I guess like this?

Reviewer: yeah

	pub const NftsAttributeDepositBase: Balance = UniquesAttributeDepositBase::get();
	pub const NftsDepositPerByte: Balance = UniquesDepositPerByte::get();
}
```

In the existing setup, the Uniques are defined with specific deposit values for different elements:

```rust
parameter_types! {
	pub const UniquesCollectionDeposit: Balance = UNITS / 10; // 1 / 10 UNIT deposit to create a collection
	pub const UniquesItemDeposit: Balance = UNITS / 1_000; // 1 / 1000 UNIT deposit to mint an item
	pub const UniquesMetadataDepositBase: Balance = deposit(1, 129);
	pub const UniquesAttributeDepositBase: Balance = deposit(1, 0);
	pub const UniquesDepositPerByte: Balance = deposit(0, 1);
}
```
As we can see in the code definition above the current code does not use the `deposit` funtion when the collection in the following instances: `UniquesCollectionDeposit` and  `UniquesItemDeposit`.

### Proposed Modification Using the Deposit Function

This proposed modification adjusts the deposits to use the `deposit` function instead of using an arbitrary number.

```rust
parameter_types! {
	pub const NftsCollectionDeposit: Balance = deposit(1, 130);

> 	pub const NftsItemDeposit: Balance = deposit(1, 164);

Reviewer: How did you generate these inputs? Not saying they are wrong, would just like to see a note about it.

Reviewer 2: Hey sure!

https://github.com/vikiival/rfc-pricing

	pub const NftsMetadataDepositBase: Balance = deposit(1, 129);
	pub const NftsAttributeDepositBase: Balance = deposit(1, 0);
	pub const NftsDepositPerByte: Balance = deposit(0, 1);
}
```

Calculations viewed bellow were calculated by using the following repository [rfc-pricing](https://github.com/vikiival/rfc-pricing).
**Polkadot**
| **Name**                  | **Current price implementation** | **Proposed Modified by using the new deposit function** |
|---------------------------|----------------------------------|-------------------------|
| collectionDeposit         | 10 DOT                           | 0.20064 DOT             |

> | itemDeposit               | 0.01 DOT                         | 0.20081 DOT             |

Reviewer: Interesting, 20x increase.

Author: That's why we propose a further reduction for _itemDeposit_ in the next paragraph by 40 
```rust 
pub const NftsItemDeposit: Balance = deposit(1, 164) / 40;
```

| collectionDeposit         | 10 DOT                           | 0.20064 DOT         |
| itemDeposit               | 0.01 DOT                         | 0.005 DOT           |
| metadataDepositBase       | 0.20129 DOT                      | 0.002 DOT           |
| attributeDepositBase      | 0.2 DOT                          | 0.002 DOT           |

**Kusama**
| **Name**                  | **Current price implementation** | **Proposed Price in KSM** |
|---------------------------|----------------------------------|---------------------------|
| collectionDeposit         | 0.1 KSM                          | 0.006688 KSM              |
| itemDeposit               | 0.001 KSM                        | 0.000167 KSM              |
| metadataDepositBase       | 0.006709666617 KSM               | 0.0006709666617 KSM       |
| attributeDepositBase      | 0.00666666666 KSM                | 0.000666666666 KSM        |

## Discussion of Other Proposals
Several innovative proposals have been considered to enhance the network's adaptability and manage deposit requirements more effectively:

### Enhanced Weak Governance Origin Model

> The concept of a weak governance origin, controlled by a consortium like the System Collective, has been proposed. This model would allow for dynamic adjustments of NFT deposit requirements in response to market conditions, adhering to storage deposit norms. 

Reviewer: What is the System Collective?

Author: https://forum.polkadot.network/t/polkadot-assethub-high-nft-collection-deposit/4262/16

- **Adjustment of Constants**: To finely tune the pricing rise, one of the function's constants could correlate with the total number of NFTs on AssetHub. This would align the deposit requirements with the actual usage and growth of the network.

### Linking Deposit to USD(x) Value
This approach suggests pegging the deposit value to a stable currency like the USD, introducing predictability and stability for network users.

**Considerations and Challenges:**
- **Market Dynamics**: One perspective is that fluctuations in native currency value naturally balance user participation and pricing, deterring network spam while encouraging higher-value collections. Conversely, there's an argument for allowing broader participation if the DOT/KSM value increases.
- **Complexity and Risks**: Implementing a USD-based pricing system could add complexity and potential risks. The implementation needs to be carefully designed to avoid unintended consequences, such as excessive reliance on external financial systems or currencies.

> Each of these proposals offers unique advantages and challenges. The optimal approach may involve a combination of these ideas, carefully adjusted to address the specific needs and dynamics of the Polkadot and Kusama networks.

Reviewer: I think we can probably do a combination of these two. It'd require some implementation, so switching to `deposit()` would be phase one, and then we could do something like:

- Function 1: Deposit (in DOT) as a function of number of collections.
- Function 2: Fixed USD(x) cost as a ceiling.
- Actual deposit: `min(F1, F2)`

Reviewer 3: I'm curious about the motivation behind increasing the deposit based on the number of collections. If the proposed floor deposits are too low to prevent spam, in theory, the function will adjust the deposit value to a more reasonable one and continue to grow, potentially raising a barrier for creators again.

This leads me to think that the primary challenge is to find an optimal deposit value, which depends on the DOT/KSM price and our current technology state (as mentioned by @burdges [here](https://github.com/polkadot-fellows/RFCs/pull/45#issuecomment-1798950680)). If there is no optimal value, we will need to explore technical solutions.

If what I've said withstands criticism, we could have a scale factor parameter that can be changed through a referendum and deposits could also be linked to the USD price. Additionally, we should explore and learn how to estimate such an optimal deposit value.
